{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg10000\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset77 Verdana-Bold;}{\f2\fnil\fcharset77 Verdana;}}
{\*\generator Msftedit 5.41.15.1507;}\viewkind4\uc1\pard\ri720\lang3081\b\f0\fs24 E\lang1033\f1 lectronic Archeology:  reconstructing the lost \ldblquote Crazy Otto\rdblquote\par
\b0\f2 -Gatinho, July 3, 2009\par
\par
In attempting to reproduce this lost arcade legend, it was my goal to do it as accurately as possible.  To begin, I started with exhaustive research, including review of public records, summaries of court case settlements, and media archive research.  Although I contacted their offices, the original developers Kevin Curran and Doug MacRae declined to comment.\par
\par
Crazy Otto\rquote s birth history begins with GCC, which was founded in 1981 during the video game craze. Kevin Curran and MIT classmates Doug MacRae, John Tylko, Chris Rode, Steve Golson and Mike Horowitz began by developing enhancements for arcade games already in existence, under a company name they called General Computing Company.  One of their products was a Pac-Man derivative they called \ldblquote Crazy Otto".  In the course of things, \ldblquote Crazy Otto\rdblquote  was eventually replaced with the sprites of \ldblquote Ms. Pac-Man,\rdblquote  and the fate of the original \ldblquote Crazy Otto\rdblquote  boards remains a mystery.  While the code can be reconstituted, there is no public evidence of any original PROM or board from 1981 surviving with the code intact.\par
\par
We know that the original code of \ldblquote Crazy Otto\rdblquote  does in fact exist, however, because it is referenced in the lawsuit \ldblquote GCC vs. Namco,\rdblquote  wherein GCC successfully defended their ownership of the concept of the \ldblquote Pac Family\rdblquote .  GCC was able to prove it created the concept of Pac family members by displaying their \ldblquote Crazy Otto\rdblquote  game, complete with its three-act intermission sequences, wherein Crazy Otto meets his female counter-part, falls in love, and finally a stork delivers their baby in the third act.\par
\par
During Crazy Otto's development, GCC kept many of the original \ldblquote Pac-Man\rdblquote  concepts, including the pill eating maze-based platform.  But \ldblquote Crazy Otto\rdblquote  was still landmark, in that it added many new elements to the Pac-Man saga.\par
\par
While Pac-man offered stationary bonus fruits to be eaten, \ldblquote Crazy Otto\rdblquote  introduced moving fruit.  Instead of appearing in the center of the maze, fruits enter the maze through one of the warp tunnels and bounced along the maze before exiting again if uneaten.\par
\par
The new "ghosts" also introduced pseudo-random movement, making it harder for enthusiasts to follow set patterns through levels, making the game more challenging and unpredictable. Three of the original ghost names where kept the same as the American \ldblquote Pac-Man\rdblquote  ghosts, being Blinky, Pinky, and Inky.  The exception was the orange ghost, Clyde, who was renamed after developer Doug Macrae\rquote s sister Sue.\par
\par
Further, instead of the same repetitious map, \ldblquote Crazy Otto\rdblquote  featured 4 different maze layouts, which alternated every 2 to 4 screens.\par
\par
Also added where small movie intermissions in three acts wherein Crazy Otto meets his female counter-part, falls in love, and eventually has a baby.\par
\par
Act I - They Meet: Crazy-Otto enters from the right being chased by Inky. His female counter-part enters from the other side being chased by Pinky. As the two of them are about to collide, they quickly move upwards, causing Inky and Pinky to collide. Crazy Otto and his lady face each other at the top of the screen, and a heart appears above them. This intermission is played after Round two.\par
\par
Act II - The Chase: Crazy Otto and his paramour are seen giving each other a playful chase. One chases the other in one direction, and they take turns alternating who chases who and in what direction. After three turns, they chase each other twice more at a faster speed. This intermission is played after Round five.\par
\par
Act III - Junior: Crazy Otto and his bride anxiously await the arrival of a stork, which flies overhead with a bundle. As the stork is about to pass over them, he releases the bundle, which drops to the ground in front of the couple, and opens up to reveal a baby. This intermission, which is played after Rounds 9, 13, and 17, would later serve as the introductory sequence to "Jr. Pac-Man". Midway also later released "Baby Pac-Man" as a pinball/video hybrid. General Computing sued Midway, claiming they had created the concept of a Pac Family, as introduced in this third intermission. They won the suit and were awarded royalties from the entire Pac Family franchise.\par
\par
Midway was, back in 1981, anxiously awaiting Namco\rquote s release of its sequel to Pac-Man, called \ldblquote Super Pac-Man\rdblquote , whose production was being delayed. GCC pitched their product to Midway, America\rquote s distributor of Namco\rquote s Pac-Man franchise.  When they saw \ldblquote Crazy Otto\rdblquote , they knew it would expediently fill the need, and so purchased the rights to the game (As mentioned earlier, Namco would later sue and also subsequently acquire the final rights).\par
\par
GCC and Midway together showcased three \ldblquote Crazy Otto\rdblquote  cabinets, one in Boston and two in Chicago.\par
\par
We know the cabinets Crazy Otto was tested in were straight stock Midway Pac Man cabinets, as evidenced from audio of an interview with Steve Golson and Mike Horowitz wherein they describe taking three cabinets straight off the Pac Man assembly line and putting the Crazy Otto kit in them for field testing.  This is confirmed also by the fact that a Time photographer, sent to get a picture of Pac Man, by pure chance, took a picture of one of the Pac Man cabinets outfitted with Crazy Otto roms.  In the same audio interview of Steve Golsen, the designers calculate the odds of that photographer taking a picture of one of the three rare Otto sets in the Pac Man cabinet.\par
\par
After Midway acquires Crazy Otto, Midway\rquote s marketing department felt a female Pac-Man would be more marketable, and Crazy Otto\rquote s graphic sprites were replaced with the female version of Pac-Man, borrowing from Crazy-Otto\rquote s female counterpart, adding lipstick, a mole, and a hair-bow.  Otherwise, they left the \ldblquote Crazy-Otto\rdblquote  code mostly unchanged, and \ldblquote Ms. Pac-Man\rdblquote  plays essentially as it was originally designed under the \ldblquote Crazy Otto\rdblquote  moniker.  For the first time in video-game history, the game's lead character was female. She was originally dubbed Pac-Woman.   Pac-Woman was later deemed to be too \ldblquote feminist\rdblquote , and her name was changed to \ldblquote Mrs. Pac-Man\rdblquote .  This too had issue.  Midway felt that the \ldblquote Mrs.\rdblquote  was too formal and didn\rquote t appeal to the youthful female audience they were trying to target, and the character\rquote s name was again changed to \ldblquote Miss. Pac-Man\rdblquote .  After that, it was pointed out that the character has a baby during intermission Act Three, and \ldblquote Miss\rdblquote  specifically refers to a young unwed girl.  The name was finally changed to the more ambiguous \ldblquote Ms.\rdblquote  to promote the social moral of marriage before conception without sounding as adult as \ldblquote Mrs.\rdblquote  did.\par
\par
No known rom or board-set with the original sprites of \ldblquote Crazy Otto\rdblquote  is accounted for publicly.  As a result, collectors remain optimistic that an original set may one-day surface.  Only a single image of Crazy Otto is known to exist, which is often erroneously attributed to a published Time Magazine article \ldblquote Pac-Man Fever\rdblquote  from April 5\super th\nosupersub , 1982.  It actually appeared in the cover story from January 1982 \ldblquote Gronk! Flash! Zap! Video games are blitzing the world.\rdblquote\par
\par
In producing my interpret remake of the lost 1981 \ldblquote Crazy Otto\rdblquote , I of course started back with the current \ldblquote Ms. Pac-Man\rdblquote  roms, loaned to me by my good friend and fellow arcade enthusiast.  After extensive research, it became apparent that the reverse-design is mostly graphic, considering GCC references state they merely changed the \ldblquote Crazy Otto\rdblquote  sprites into \ldblquote Ms. Pac-Man\rdblquote  at Midway\rquote s request.  From court documents, we know everything else remains essentially the same, even up to and including the three-part intermissions.  Some parts that remains entirely undocumented is the ghost sprites while edible and the death sequence of Crazy Otto himself.\par
\par
When Ms. Pac-Man dies, she merely rotates about her axis.  Considering Ms. Pacman\rquote s summersaulting death sequence is played out over many uneccessarily repeated frames in the graphic rom, it stands to reason the original death sequence for Otto was much more complex.  If Otto also originally merely summersaulted to his death as the Misses does, there would be no need for so many unique frames when a single frame-image could simply be rotated with code to produce the death sequence.  Considering, unlike the Pac-people, Crazy Otto has legs, it makes sense that he would not summersault repetitively as did the round Misses, but rather his legs would come into play in his death, just as they did in his life.  Given this, the most logical sequence would be poor Otto pivoting on his ambulatory appendages, before succumbing to the \ldblquote gravity\rdblquote  that pulls him down prone, as any other legged creature would be compelled. In doing so, it would require many unique frames to see his front, profiles, and back as he spins, accounting for the extra frames in the death sequence.  And thus, I end Crazy Otto\rquote s life in a \ldblquote Hollywood pirouette\rdblquote  before he lays prostrate in death, similar to Ms. Pac-Man\rquote s somersaulting death, but about the axis that are his legs instead of the axis which is her circle\rquote s center.\par
\par
There is no record for the appearance of the "ghosts" when they are edible, so for now they look like Pac Man ghosts minus pixels for the Crazy Otto feet.\par
\par
Another uncertainty is when a specific sprite came to be mis-rotated; specifically a specific \ldblquote partner\rdblquote  sprite\'c9 Ms. Otto (or Pac Man as it appears in the Ms. Pacman set).  The sprite in \ldblquote Ms. Pacman\rdblquote  for Pacman, when his mouth is closed, is entirely round.  It\rquote s orientation is entirely arbitrary since he is round, and so no one notices the rotation of the object when Pacman is supposed to walk upwards is off by 90 degrees.  To interpolate that same code backwards into Ms. Otto as she appears in \ldblquote Crazy Otto\rdblquote , it doesn\rquote t work, since even with her mouth closed she still has legs, and thus her orientation is important.  As a result, in the animated intermissions, when she is supposed to be walking upwards, she is seen standing on her head when her mouth is closed.  Either this glitch persisted from the beginning in Crazy Otto, or the rotation code was miss-oriented at some point during the conversion which no one noticed since the sprite became the round Pac Man.\par
\par
\par
July 3, 2009\par
Gatinho\par
\par
Crazy Otto (c) 1981 General Computer Corporation.\par
}
 